if you just become the mirror opposite
of that which you're opposing it's not
the mere opposite it's you become the
mere reaction to that which you were
opposing then you will fall prey to the
same
set of problems the conservatives are
toying with censorship as an answer to
the problem of the woke miasma I do
believe that no has to be said to drag
queen's Story Hour but by the same token
as soon as you go down the the book
forbidding root you instantly introduce
into your own ethos the problem of
enabling the sensors who are operating
by the same principles
in principle on your side I see the
anti-woke instinctively going to a
position of well whatever we're being
told is automatically untrue and
automatically wrong and that means that
they no longer believe in the concept of
truth either if to you the truth is the
opposite of what the mainstream is
saying you don't believe in truth either
all you believe is in this pointless
destructive battle that in which truth
and reality no longer exists and if your
claim is
that we cannot agree on truth without
God
then uh maybe uh maybe I'm I'm gonna
potentially agree with you that that's
perhaps what the world needs because if
you think that's the only way we're
going to give our own truth we need
something because right now neither side
knows what the truth is
[Music]
hello everyone watching and listening on
YouTube and Associated platforms I'm
speaking today with Constantine kison
who's a Russian British satirist social
commentator author and podcast host
trigonometry he has written for
Publications such as Colette and the
Daily Telegraph and his book an
immigrant's love letter to the West is a
Sunday Times bestseller
kissing has been a popular guest on Good
Morning Britain
and has amassed over 100 million views
for arguing against woke culture during
a filmed recent Oxford Union debate
as I said he's also the co-host of the
podcast trigonometry alongside Francis
Foster together they have garnered over
400 000 subscribers having in-depth
discussions that Center on support for
free speech in our society hello Mr
Kissin it's good to see you today
um I'm looking forward to our
conversation we've talked a little bit
before on trigonometry and have we met
in person a couple of times yeah thank I
feel I feel honored that you didn't
remember me thanks Jordan
yeah well my memories my memory has its
problems tonight and you meet a lot of
people virtually yes well it's hard too
when you meet people virtually it's hard
to remember if you met them virtually or
if you met them in person and they're
thicker and and taller in person but
other than that it's you know a similar
experience so you were just at the
Oxford Union and you seem to have
manage something approximating a hit as
far as those things go and so what do
you think you did right and why did what
you do what you did
have the cultural impact it has had how
many people you know how many people
have watched that so far it's very
difficult to measure because it goes
into private telegram channels WhatsApp
groups Etc but I'm guessing somewhere
between 100 and 200 million at this
point
um and in terms of why I think it got
the resonance that it did I think there
are a few factors I think the first one
is something that you actually discussed
with Joe Rogan recently which is the
world's crying out for a positive vision
of the future those of us who spend a
lot of time trying to work out what this
craziness was happening uh in the west
and why it was happening uh we we had to
do it from a position of critique and
criticism and we've spent five years in
our case on trigonometry doing that and
you you was you started earlier but now
I think the world is in a position where
it's looking for a positive message and
and that is actually one of the things
that I tried to do I tried to persuade
people who were their dogs with Union at
that debate and I said to him look I
don't want to talk to those of you who
already agree with me I'm more
interested in talking to those of you
who may be woke that was the debate I
was invited to participate in uh and who
are open to rational argument so I think
that was part of it and the second part
of it Jordan and again I think this is
something you'll be well aware of uh we
live in a society in which adults are
afraid to tell children what they need
to hear and so I think a lot of people
resonated with the fact that this was
somebody who was an adult standing up in
front of young people and challenging
them to be better as opposed to either
pandering to their preconceived beliefs
and biases or uh cowering away from
having that debate so I think those two
things combined plus a rational argument
a few jokes uh you throw that in the mix
and you've got yourself a good speech
yeah
yeah one of the things
that on the part
the part are the comments we could
elaborate on the comments you made in
relationship to Absolute privation and
poverty and so many people who are
watching and listening might not be
aware but
we there was plenty of Dooms saying in
the 1960s with regards to the population
catastrophe and uh prognostications on
the part of people like Paul Ehrlich
most famously who wrote the population
bomb that by the year 2000 we'd be out
of all our primary resources and
everyone would be starving and none of
that happened in fact primary resources
became more plentiful and less expensive
and we have twice as many people on the
planet as he was paranoid about in the
year 2000 so 8 billion instead of the
dreaded 4 billion and
well that's happened everyone
virtually everyone it's seven billion
out of 8 billion people on the planet
now have basic accesses have access to
basic resources and so we've all got
richer and there's a hell of a lot more
of us now the the uh apocalyptic
moralists
who want
to to save the planet let's say
still are putting forward the story that
what we're doing is not quote
sustainable that we need five Earths to
feed everyone
on the planet at the level that the West
currently enjoys and they're
they're what would you call recipe for
future progress is a limits to growth
model and the problem with the limits to
growth model is well first of all it's
hypocritical because the people who are
proposing it aren't going to be the
people who are suffering from it that's
for sure and second
it's wrong technically because and I
think you did a good job of pointing
this out in the Oxford speech
poor people
can't care about long-term
sustainability and iterability they're
so busy scrabbling in the dirt for their
next meal trying to get fresh water
access to basic hygiene uh facilities
the next meal that anything
approximating a medium to long-term
vision is out of their reach and so they
sacrifice the future to the present so
they can survive
but if you get people up to about five
thousand dollars per year in gross
domestic product productivity per capita
they immediately start to take a longer
View and I I figured this out about 15
years ago when I was perversely working
on the UN sustainable development goals
trying to make them less socialist and
destructive than they were and uh it
looked to me like we could have our cake
and eat it too that the best policy
possible to produce a quote sustainable
Planet would be the one that ameliorates
poverty especially on the energy front
as rapidly as possible so that's part of
a positive vision
I I agree completely and look I'm by no
means a climate expert but even as a
just an outside Observer someone whose
primary job is podcast and Saturday so I
can see that a lot of the narratives
that we have they seem to have more in
common with a religious world view or a
cult-like world view than they do with a
practical attempt to solve the real
problems that we face and I was born in
the Soviet Union and I've lived all over
the world in many poor countries so uh
you know I don't have the the you know
we talk so much about privilege nowadays
in our society Jordan we've got male
privilege and white privilege and all
sorts of other privilege the main
privilege that we don't talk about is
Western privilege and it takes Western
privilege to fail to understand that
what you just said which is the poor
people don't care about quote unquote
saving the planet because they've got
more immediate priorities and so even if
you accept the entirety of the climate
change argument and this is the point
that I made in the speech whining about
it or reducing consumption in Britain
which is produces one percent of global
carbon emissions and is responsible for
another one percent so in total two
percent it makes no difference it will
not solve the problem uh when China and
India are busy trying to get their
people to avoid starving to death and so
uh what I see is a kind of uh doomsday
cult that seems to have taken over and
politically we seem to be pandering to
that instead of dealing with the real
challenges of the world and by the way
it clearly has impact all over the place
I mean if you look at what happened in
Germany uh Germany for purely political
and ideological reasons shut down its
nuclear power stations it's now a paid
South Africa and Michael schellenberger
covered this on his sub stack paid South
Africa to not use coal well now what and
now the import call back from South
Africa and burn it uh and also of course
they made themselves extremely dependent
uh on Russian gas at the time which I
hope the war in Ukraine is something we
get to get on to talking about I hope so
too well yeah so what you get in Germany
is the worst and and and for all those
people who are watching and listening
who might have environmental concerns
look if you have environmental concerns
one of your goals is in principle to
improve the environment now if you
implement a set of policies that make
energy five times as expensive which is
what's happened in Germany and you
improve things on the pollution front at
least you could say well you know energy
is much more expensive and that's pretty
hard on the poor people but look we've
accomplished one of our own goals and
you know that you'd have to contend
seriously with an opponent who put
forward put forward an argument like
that but if the reality on the ground is
well we made energy five times as
expensive
we've made ourselves hyper reliant on
the Russians and a single point of
failure on the energy front
and we're producing far more pollution
particularly in relationship to Coal
burning and the grid is much less
reliable than it used to be it's like
well you didn't just fail according to
my definition of failure
you failed according to your definition
of failure and so how in the world is
that even possibly Justified and then I
think we get into the religious realm
yes at that point and so Alex Epstein
has done a pretty good job of laying
this out uh I like Lumberg on the ipcc
front and we'll get back to that you
know accepting the idea that there will
be something like two degrees of climate
change in the next hundred years and and
figuring out what to do with that but
Epstein has pointed out in his new book
um fossil fuel future
he laid out
something I'd also investigated in my
maps of meaning book this underlying
religious narrative and
it's basically a Gaia narrative it's an
earth worshiping metaphysic and it is a
religious and it's implicit structure
and the idea is that the ver the planet
is a help hapless fragile virgin
threatened by a rapacious consuming
tyrannical Giant and not society and
that the individual is a parasitical
Predator riding the back of that
rapacious monster and that is a
religious narrative and it's religious
because it it it's a fundamental
narrative that frames everything else
and it also
partakes of the archetypal underlying
structure that makes religious stories
religious and I so you can you could
conjure up an opposite story right
and this would flesh out the religious
landscape the opposite story would be
nature is a hideous gorgon-like demon
who's hell-bent at every aspect to
frees us into Terror and devour us
that's nature read in claw and tooth
culture is the Walled Garden it's the
walls of the Walled Garden that protects
us from the absolute ravages of Nature
and the human being is a heroic
enterpriser
Banton
entering into a relationship with the
planet and with culture that
approximates something like
environmental stewardship it's a much
more positive Vision now it casts nature
into disrepute and probably elevates
culture to
unidimensionally but you need both sides
of that picture in order to have a
complete picture of the world so for so
kids are being offered an incomplete
religious view of the world that's
focused on nature as hapless virgin and
so everything is being sacrificed to her
and that's Complicated by another fact
and Constantine I think this has to do
with the problem that the conservatives
and the Liberals for that matter real
liberals haven't been able to come up
with a promising vision
is that while adolescents enter this
period that Jean Piaget called the
Messianic
now not everyone gets to that point but
relatively cognitively sophisticated
kids do and so this is about age 16 to
20 let's say this is also when you want
to induct kids into the Armed Forces if
you actually want to manage it
effectively it's really when their final
touches of their enculturation occur
it's when their prefrontal cortexes
prune themselves most thoroughly
um
another that happens also between the
ages of two and four but it happens
between 16 and 20. you sort of die into
your into your adult self
anyways
Piaget noted that people of that age
cross-culturally have a desire to
identify with a purpose that transcends
themselves and that would be cultural
identity right and they need that they
find it in music often they find it in
their subcultures but they need to be
offered that and it it is there's
something heroic about it because they
actually do want to look outside
themselves and then you know the radical
envious lefties come along and say well
all you have to do is wave a placard at
an oil company and now your culture hero
of the universe and you know standing
next shoulder to shoulder with the
Messiah himself and that's pretty damn
appalling and it's certainly not true
but in the absence of an alternative
Vision then people are going to
gravitate towards that as they do and so
you can't blame you can't exactly blame
young people for that even though it's
tempting
now and then there's a narcissistic
element too
so
one of the things I really like about
Bjorn lomberg you know he accepts the
ipcc climate projections two degrees in
a hundred years he's attempted to model
that as decrement GDP production so he
figures
given current trends will be 400 percent
richer by the year 2100 but then you can
knock off
some percentage of that because of the
costs of climate change and that'll be
non-trivial I think he basically
concludes will be like 350 percent
richer instead of 400 percent and that's
not nothing
but it's by no means a catastrophe and
he's pointed out very clearly too that
even in the ipcc reports themselves
there's no looming apocalypse and the
idea that there's a scientific consensus
about the apocalypse that's a lie now I
think the reason people want to fall for
it is because we also like to accrue to
ourselves unearned moral stature and if
we can get moral stature by waving a
placard while we're complaining about an
oil company while driving to the protest
then that's a lot easier than doing all
the hard work that would be necessary to
actually
you know
start a family and operate properly in a
community and maybe
join a church or join a political party
and actually Trump through the difficult
process of trying to figure out how to
do something concrete and real that
would actually be of service and so this
woke Enterprise is extremely attractive
to narcissists and not that doesn't mean
they're all narcissists but it's
extremely attractive to narcissists and
so that's a like a panoply of problems
um all of which we're facing
simultaneously so well Jordan let me
pick up on a couple of those points uh
well a few actually so first of all in
terms of this religious worldview I
think one of the other things that's so
appealing about it is human beings uh
crave doomsday scenarios the idea that
we living in some kind of unique moment
in human history when the world's about
to be destroyed whether that's true or
not by the way is incredibly appealing
that is something that gives you life
meaning and purpose even if your life
has no meaning and purpose and the thing
with this work ideology is that and this
is something I kind of started to notice
is you know my journey into this
discussion in general was through comedy
I I was a stand-up comedian uh and in
2015 2016 in particular I started to
look around and I just saw a lot of
people who who seemed for some reason to
suddenly hate themselves like it was so
suddenly normal as a comedian you spend
most of your time backstage listening to
other Comedians and out of the blue
you'd start getting these kids in their
20s going on stage and going well I'm a
white guy therefore blah blah blah and
then they do a bunch of self-deprecating
jokes the the premise of which was
because they were white they were evil
and and this ideology I think is
fundamentally about self-hate and if you
hate yourself well why wouldn't you
crave the punishment that you therefore
deserve right and I think the Doomsday
narrative Maps so well onto Wilderness
for that for that reason as well
[Music]
despite the U.S blowing through the 31.4
trillion dollar debt ceiling last month
the White House still refuses to reduce
spending our national leadership has
buried their heads in the sand but you
don't have to call the experts at Birch
gold today and start diversifying into
gold for over 5 000 years gold has
withstood inflation geopolitical turmoil
and stock market crashes with help from
the experts at Birch gold you can own
gold and attack sheltered retirement
account Birch gold makes it easy to
convert an IRA or 401K into an IRA in
Precious Metals just text Jordan to
989898 to claim your free info kit on
gold and then talk to one of their
precious metal Specialists with an
A-Plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau thousands of happy customers and
countless five-star reviews you can
trust Birch gold to help protect your
savings text Jordan to 989898 today
[Music]
we need a place
symbolically speaking we need a place to
put hell and we need a place to put the
apocalypse and the reason we need a
place to put the apocalypse is because
the human vision is apocalyptic and the
reason for that is that we all die right
everything comes to a cataclysmic halt
for everyone and it could happen at any
moment and it could not only happen to
you it could happen to you and everyone
you love and it could happen to your
whole society and and that sort of thing
has happened and it definitely always
threatens and so one of our existential
problems is that we always have to face
the apocalypse and the way that's been
handled in in the symbolic landscape of
Christianity is that the apocalypse is
is a distant it's a distant occurrence
in a Heavenly place now it's ambivalent
right but it's it's turned into a
psychological reality or a spiritual
reality and an ever-present spiritual
reality instead of being necessarily
played out in the here and now but then
there's a place for it and that's
appropriate because there should be a
place for it and we're also tilted as
information processes very hard to the
overweighting of negative information
and the reason for that I would say is
well you can only be so happy but you
can be really really in pain and then
dead and So you you're more sensitive to
a unit of threat than you are motivated
by a unit of pleasure and that's well
documented and so then we also have to
contend with the fact that we're tilted
towards hyper processing negative
information and then on the privilege
front
this is a really complicated one
I think that some of the guilt that the
woke types are capitalizing on and also
genuinely experiencing is a consequence
of the felt need for some true atonement
so you talked about Western privilege
and so you know if you live in the west
you're in the top one percent by global
and historical standards so you are
privileged and then you have to contend
with the fact that
well you didn't really
earn that not to some degree because
your pathway forward is going to be
proportionate in its
success to your work but you know you're
born and there are highways and there
are Automobiles and there's an
electrical grid and you have this wealth
that's offered to you and then you might
say well that's unearned privilege and
to some degree it is and then the
question emerges well what should you do
about that and one answer is to
flagellate yourself and to feel guilty
because there are people out there who
weren't arbitrarily rewarded to the same
degree you were and that is an
existential problem and the other
solution is to
do whatever you can to earn your
earn the gifts you've been given the
talents you've been provided with right
and to say well my goal is to
justify by my actions the Privileges and
opportunities I have been granted and
then to work hard to extend those to the
degree that's possible to the people
around me and to others and I would say
that's genuine atonement and I think
everyone has to do that and so you know
if you're not living a life that says
moral as you are privileged you're going
to lay yourself open on the guilt front
and then the woke ideologues are going
to tear a strip off you and certainly
these these kids that you've observed
flagellating themselves for their
privilege they don't know how to atone
for the fact that there is an unequal
distribution of talents and that seems
to be built into the cosmic structure
well that's why I felt it was so
important that someone told them that
and everything you said particularly
about how to
um how to respond to privilege it
resonates with me so much because I've
been you know my family's been destitute
my family's been very wealthy I've been
the son of a very rich family I've also
been someone who slept on the street for
weeks like I've seen both of those and
and what I learned from all of those
experiences is that like you said you
have to make the most of it and then
extend that opportunity to other people
um and and that's the only way of
dealing with it and there's no other way
um if you want to be constructive but
let's come back to your point about a
positive vision for the future and why
conservatives uh will struggle with that
I think one of the reasons is that
inevitably young people do need to rebel
against something and conservative
instinctively want to suppress all
Rebellion because they want to avoid
change and that's why as someone who's
kind of some I call myself politically
non-binary that's why I'm excited about
talking about this political vision and
positive not political a positive vision
of the future because I think that's
what's needed and I don't think the
anti-woke position which a lot of us
have had to engage in for some time uh
is going to be the answer because you
have to have something that people buy
into and it can't be normative in the
way that conservatives often want it to
be you must do this that's not going to
work with young people they don't want
that what they want is something that
allows them to channel their Rebellion
into something heroic and productive as
you said which is why I think showing
young people the way out of wokeness
through what I talked about in the
speech and what you and I just talked
about which is work hard build and
create that is going to be the way and
um I think you you probably know my
friend Melissa Chen she tweeted
something about this years ago that I
thought it was so spot-on she said
um you cannot remake remain woke if you
build anything whether that's a business
whether that's muscle whether that's a
family and that's why I challenge these
kids the dogs of the union and the
audience who were watching of course to
build and create things because the
moment you start you suddenly find out
that hey just whining about stuff
doesn't work and when you get down to
the business of doing things turns out
there's a reason that things are the way
they are there's a reason things don't
work quite the way you'd like them to
because reality suddenly comes into
conflict with ideology and so that's why
I think it's so important to give kids
and young people a path to doing things
because it's only when you're doing
things that you start to realize the
limitations and the the you know I'm a
huge fan of Thomas Saul and this is one
of his things that that he always says
that there are no Solutions only
trade-offs and you only learn this as a
young person by the experience of doing
stuff because when you're young you come
at the world and you go well the world
isn't perfect I must perfect the world
and no one's explained to you and you
probably didn't listen if they tried to
explain to you the the fact is the world
is not perfectable the world will always
be imperfect and all you can do is
Tinker at the edges to try and improve
it so one of the things I've noticed on
my tour one of the things that's
perplexed me let's say is that I wrote
these books that are full of rules and
you might think that that would turn
people off for the reasons that you just
described young people being turned off
by let's call it conservative moralizing
and that's a kind of finger shaking you
should and should is
if you were doing your duty it's
something like that yes and look you
should do your duty and but you can also
understand why young people would chafe
against that because
well why should they be certain that
doing their Duty in that in exactly the
same manner that duplicates the past is
the best pathway forward because
sometimes it clearly isn't and there are
inadequacies of the past that need to be
rectified so the conservatives stumble
in relationship to establishing
a bridge to Young People by
being moralizing and the more
Evangelical types of say fundamental
Christians fall into the same problem
now one of the things I've noticed and
this has been very very cool and I've
really tested this in hundreds of venues
is
I usually sometime in one of my lectures
in my lectures talk about the
relationship the necessity of finding
meaning
as a as the antithesis of suffering
let's say because
the quest for meaning becomes most
compelling when you're simultaneously
suffering or someone you love is
suffering uh that's when they
that's when the arrow Finds Its Mark
let's say and I
walk people through a thought exercise I
suppose is well
what do you have
when you're suffering that's going to
sustain you and you might say well
you have the work that you're still
capable of doing and the fruits of your
labor that might offer you some security
you have whatever creative Enterprises
you might be able to engage in that
still contain the shadow of meaning at
least then you have your intimate
relationship and the person who might be
caring for you while you're in Dreadful
condition and you have your family and
your friends and that's really what you
have and then on the abstract end you
know maybe you have Beauty and truth and
Justice and you know the noble ideals
but then you might ask yourself well
how do you
how do you have the
the Armament of work and creative
Endeavor and friends and family and the
answer to that is that's in precise
proportion to the amount of
responsibility you've taken for
developing those relationships and those
abilities that's right and so there's a
clear pathway between the voluntary
adoption of responsibility and the
meaning that will sustain you through
suffering and that's a much better
enticement to participation for young
people than a kind of finger wagging
top-down morality which is you must
behave this way you know or you're no
good and even though I as I said there's
some truth in that it's not an
Invitational Vision no
and I I think that there's a way to
summarize that very neatly Jordan which
is what I know would work for me which
is to say there are things that you want
what are they
and if you want those things this is
what you need to do you don't have to do
it I'm not saying you must do it I'm not
your dad but if you want to achieve
these outcomes that you care about then
you're gonna have to put in the work and
I'm not telling you which outcomes you
should pursue necessarily but the way to
get there isn't going to be to glue
yourself to a road to stop an ambulance
get into a hospital which is what these
Extinction Rebellion people do here in
the UK and I think that once people
young people are on that path we don't
get to control the art and the culture
that they're going to create that is
their path and that is their Duty and
that is their job to do uh but if if
they are doing it from a place of
constructive taking on responsibility as
you say putting in the effort building
and creating things for the future then
I think that is part of the vision for
them because as you say I think we live
in a society particularly now
you know I'm not a religious person but
it's clear to me that uh with the death
of God you end up in a position where a
lot of people lack meaning and of course
you've got all sorts of other economic
disincentives for people to have meaning
it's harder to start a family uh people
are deferring it until a later point I
myself you know I just turned 40 and we
had our first child only a year ago less
than a year ago so a lot of young people
are in that position now and it's having
that experience that changes you uh and
makes you more responsible it forces you
to take on responsibility it also forces
you to look at the world in a different
way so uh that I think is part of the
vision uh and uh you know talking about
family is difficult because again you
get to the normative position where it's
like you must have children uh which is
not what I'm saying at all but again I
think if you start from the incentive
point of view my experience of life is
that people respond first and foremost
to the incentives that are in front of
them and if you want if you like meaning
if you don't know what to do with your
life then finding an intimate partner
and having a family is going to be a big
part of that in addition to meaningful
work etc
[Music]
just like physical exercise daily
spiritual exercise is critical to your
well-being especially in a world where
attacks on faith and religion are
happening all around us every day
there's no better time for a daily habit
of prayer than during this season of
lent with hallow the number one
Christian Prayer app in the U.S and the
number one Catholic app in the world
with hallow you can pray every single
day leading up to Easter alongside world
famous Catholics and Christians like Jim
Caviezel father Mike Schmitz and even
Mark Wahlberg dive deep into scripture
and the second most read Christian book
of all time the imitation of Christ
you'll learn how to become a better
individual through prayer fasting and
giving in spite of today's broken World
download the app for free at hallow.com
Jordan set prayer reminders invite
others to pray with you and track your
progress along the way get an exclusive
three-month free trial at hallow.com
Jordan that's hallow.com Jordan
so I had lots of clients and students
who would come to me who were in search
of a meaningful pathway forward who said
well I don't know what to do and I would
say well what do you want for your life
and they say well I really don't know
and uh
and so then I learned two things about
that the first is
uh don't do nothing that's a big mistake
because all you do is get older and
weaker and you withdraw more and so
even if you don't know what to do
pursuing nothing is a very bad idea you
have no hope then because hope comes
from Pursuit and you're anxious because
you need to specify a path so you have
no hope and you're anxious if you do
nothing so nothing is not the answer
that means nihilism is not the answer
and I don't think that's shocking to
people but
it's worth laying it out because it
seems uncontroversial to me Jordan
yeah yeah yeah well you're not a
nihilist so or possessed by that except
probably sporadically
um so then the next proposition was
something like this well look you don't
know what to do
so why don't we just look and see what
other people do that that seems to work
and maybe you don't have to do any of
these things or all of these things but
if you don't know where to start
here's a good place to start and this is
also something conservatives can offer
it's like well here's the basic template
for for uh reasonably tolerable Life
we'll begin with that low bar so
there's seven or eight major domains so
you don't know what to do with your life
well let's break your life down probably
want an intimate partner
most people do now you might not but
probably you do even if you think you
don't and so you might be one of those
exceptions but don't assume that to
begin with because that's an
uncomfortable place to be if it's true
now maybe you're a radically creative
genius like Leonardo Leonardo da Vinci
or Picasso and you're so idiosyncratic
that you can't bind yourself to any one
person but you know they were one in a
billion and probably you're not now
maybe you are but that's that's a whole
different kettle of fish probably you
want a family some sort parents you want
to have a relationship with them
siblings children most people have
children that's the best relationship
you're ever going to have if you're
fortunate enough to engage in it and so
you probably need a vision for that of
some sort friends helpful to have some
friends you could develop a vision for
that you need a job or a career because
otherwise you die and people think
people think you're useless they shun
you and then you die that's a bad
outcome unless that's what you're you're
after you should regulate your behavior
in relationship to Temptations like drug
and alcohol abuse and sex because
short-term impulsive hedonic
gratification doesn't play out well
across time and it tends to make you
unpopular so that's not a good uh that's
not a good recipe for long-term progress
into the future
you should think hard about doing
something on the Civic front
you should take care of yourself
mentally and physically you should have
a plan for that you need an educational
plan because there's probably something
you could learn and get better at and
that doesn't have to be academic it
could be extremely practical or creative
and you should figure out how to make
productive generous use of the time you
have when you're not working
and so that's like a conservative Vision
right because it fleshes out the generic
landscape of human striving and it's a
good place to start if you don't know
where to start you could start with one
of those things and move towards it or
two or four and maybe you don't have to
do all of them but my experience as a
clinician has been that if you are
failing on all eight of those fronts
you're not depressed you just have a
terrible life
right so conservatives can say
traditionalists can say here's the basic
template
here's the responsibility you can find
in meaning well now you've got to Cobble
together something idiosyncratic and
unique to yourself that's that's the
making the map the archetype manifest in
the confines of your own life but that's
the basic that's the basic Way Forward
and
we've we've found if people if students
do an exercise like that a writing
exercise and answer all eight of those
questions
they're the probability that they'll
drop out of University in the first year
about 40 percent of kids do roughly
speaking in the first year or two
the probability that they'll drop out is
decreased 50 percent
so just just thinking through just
developing a vision on those fronts is
highly motivating and it keeps anxiety
at Bay and it unites people
psychologically and it helps them
identify with the pathway forward it's
not optional
so and that's an antidote to the death
of God in some real way too right that
that Journey towards an integrated
single point of meaning we should talk
about the religious front a bit because
we started talking about it
with the woke religion you know you just
Define described yourself as not
religious and so but you're concerned
about false religions right is that a
reasonable way of thinking about it yeah
I I think well I'm concerned about bad
religions and bad religions take many
forms to me this seems like a bad one uh
and religion does that sorry does that
imply that there's a good religion I I
think they reply that yeah well for me
it does in the sense that there are
forms of religion that are beneficial to
society uh and to the individuals who
participate them in my opinion uh even
though I myself cannot force myself to
believe something I don't believe right
um but this religion uh I mean it has
all the worst elements of other
religions and on top of that it doesn't
do what most other religions do which is
offer a root an actual route for
Redemption an actual root for atonement
because even if you participate in
wokeness fully and you say I I am well
I'm not but I am a straight white man
and I am guilty and the sins of the
world rest upon my shoulders what can
you do you can never purify yourself
because you can't be transracial because
that's whatever that is right that's the
worst form of racism what can you do you
can't atone no matter how many times you
kneel to BLM or whatever else it is that
you do you're never going to be clean or
purified it is a religion that says you
Jordan Peterson is a straight white man
are guilty forever and all you can do is
apologize for the rest of Eternity and
that's it that seems to me like quite a
Bad Religion
okay okay so let's play this out let and
you can help me with this and you can
take the atheistic stance and hammer
away at me okay and all all push back
I'm not an atheist by the way but go for
it oh okay okay well okay let's start by
characterizing you said you're not
religious you're not an atheist but
you're not religious so so maybe you can
clarify that I'm agnostic I have no idea
what's going on okay okay okay fine fine
so it's agnosticism all right so we're
we're playing with the proposition that
there are clearly pathological forms of
belief or and and in a deep level
pathological forms of religion okay so
so we'll start with that premise and
then the counter premise is that there
is something that's the opposite of that
and you started to flesh that out in one
dimension which is that if it's a a
genuine religion
in quotes then one of the things it
offers is an actual Pathway to atonement
which means that you have some means of
dealing with your sinful inadequacy that
doesn't Crush you okay so let me tell
you something that Carl you'll said
about the Catholics
this is very cool uh he said he really
regarded the Catholic confession as a
form of uh what would you say God God's
mercy manifested in the world
symbolically speaking and here's why
okay you're gonna do stupid and cruel
and unworthy things
even as you define them
so you're going to be guilty before
yourself forget about what other people
think you might also be guilty on that
front but you're definitely being guilty
in relationship to your own conscience
and then you have to deal with the fact
that you're not who you should be
and that can Crush you certainly that
crushes people who are depressed uh it
crushes people who are anxious and it
definitely crushes people who have
post-traumatic stress disorder because
they often develop
PTSD because they watch themselves do
something terrible
so all right so now there's an
existential problem is you've got to
stumble forward with your inadequacy now
if you're Catholic you can go to the
church
and you can say once a week or however
often you want to
here's a bunch of ways I'm really stupid
and they've hurt me and I'm trying to
detail them out completely and in
principle I'm trying to rectify those
faults right first by their admission
and second by the determination not to
propel them forward
and then the priest says okay
as far as God's concerned
that's good enough and you have to go do
these rituals of atonement and your the
slates wipe clean for the week
and you're gonna go out and be a fool
again but
you get to start again and so you're
proposing that one of the Hallmarks of a
genuinely healthy religion assuming such
a thing exists a fundamental set of
beliefs is that there has to be a
pathway forward to the rectification of
inadequacy and flaw is that is that fair
enough that is a positive aspect of
religion that I I can see yes
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new series
just the way you are what does that say
about who I should become is that just
now off the table because I'm already
good enough in every way so am I done or
something get the hell up get your act
together adopt some responsibility put
your life together develop a vision
unfold all those manifold possibilities
that lurk within be a force for good in
the world and that'll be the adventure
of your life
[Music]
okay so now you said earlier that you do
not want to be compelled to believe
things you don't believe right if I've
got that right I can't make myself
believe things I don't believe yeah yes
yes so that's like that suspension of
belief right
so so I think this is a place where both
agnostics and atheists do where things
stick in their throat in relationship to
something like the classic
judeo-christian traditional belief set
and that's parodied by the proposition
that people who have that Faith believe
in you know a bearded man in the sky
let's say and that that's so
Preposterous that no one sensible can
believe it and then if Faith requires
the sacrifice of reason to that degree
then
well then we'll sacrifice Faith instead
of Reason something like that and
there's an Enlightenment claim lurking
at the bottom of that does does that
seem reasonable all of that okay so let
me
let me set before you a set of counter
propositions and you tell me what you
think so I've been working on this idea
in my new book
um it's called we who wrestle with God
and
I've been
basing this work on the proposition that
there has to be a unifying animating
spirit and so unifying means it would
unify you psychologically so it would
bring the diverse elements of you
together so you weren't uh House Divided
unto yourself and it would also unify
other people
and it has to unify the individual and
other people simultaneously because well
you fall into disunion psychologically
and then you're anxious and hopeless and
if you fall into disunion socially then
you fight
so the alternative to a unifying vision
is psychological disintegration and
social chaos right it's Unity versus
multiplicity that's another way of
thinking about it now you can have a
tyrannical unity and that's not good
that's a tyrant literally so what might
a non-tyrannical Unity be like okay so
let me just tell you a couple of brief
stories and and very very quickly
so I think the biblical Corpus is a
metanomic
literary work it it takes
one story after another and juxtaposes
them
and somewhat
in a somewhat non-sequitur fashion
making the case that there's something
in each story that's emerging that's the
same and I would say that's the that's
the monotheistic animating spirit so it
the Bible is a series of meditations on
the nature of the monotheistic animating
spirit
and so
the next question would be what is that
spirit and I would say well that's what
those stories are trying to portray
so here's some examples and you can tell
me about tell me what you think of this
so in the story of Noah
the animating spirit so that's Yahweh is
the voice that calls the wise to prepare
when the storms are approaching
and then belief is whether you abide by
that voice or reject it belief in both
cases because you either accepted and
acted out or you rejected and act out
there's no no faith decision both of
those are a faith decision
okay so that's Noah then
in the story of the Tower of Babel which
is the next story
the animating Spirit Yahweh is portrayed
as the spirit that totalitarians compete
with when they build their towers to the
heavens
and the spirit that makes everyone speak
a different language if that
totalitarian Enterprise goes too far
that's why everybody ends up speaking a
different language like we do now we
can't even agree on what constitutes a
woman
and so God is Yahweh is presented as
something necessarily transcendent
and that if human beings build something
technological to replace that then the
consequences will be well that the
structure will be devastated and people
will no longer be able to communicate
okay and then
in the Abraham story
Abraham is privileged you could say he's
got white privilege even though he was
Middle Eastern and he has Rich parents
and he can just sit in his tent and eat
peeled grapes and do nothing and be an
overgrown infant and and he'll be secure
and and well-fed sheltered all of that
so the basic problems of his life are
solved and so far as material security
can offer that
but then a voice appears to him that
says you have to leave your comfort
everything your family your tent your
your tribe your nation you have to go
out in the world and make your way and
then Abraham does that and of course
he's father of Nations and but he does
that he has just a dreadful time of it
right it's tyranny and starvation and
the the Egyptian Ross aristoc
Aristocrats conspired to steal his wife
and you know he goes right into the
bloody mess of life and Yahweh is put
forward as the voice that calls him to
Adventure
and then I'll give you one more example
so in the story of Moses they Exodus
story Yahweh is presented as the spirit
that opposes tyranny
and opposes slavery
and leads the enslaved out into the
desert right where they're lost and
guides them when they're lost towards a
more positive vision
and so
it's an animating spirit because
animating Spirits animate you they they
Propel you into work towards movement
and you're always possessed by an
animating Spirit there's there's no way
around that it's one Spirit or another
and the monotheistic claim is that all
those animating Spirits need to be
integrated into a superordinate spirit
and that that Spirit has to be
characterized and then celebrated
so okay so that's my counter proposition
to the
atheists in the agnostics is that I
think that's all just true
that's now I don't exactly know what
yeah so well so so tell me what you
think about that you know well because
it's the last step I have a problem with
because the animating Spirit uh why that
has to be unified and codified as God is
is the part of it that I don't get
um okay for me those things could be
intuition uh I for example have a very
powerful intuition there have been many
times in my life when I've done things
that were actually counter-intuitive but
something has made me aware that what I
must do now is X right
um okay so so so so so let's go with
that something fair enough so I would
say that what you're what you're
characterizing there that intuition the
hypothesis in the biblical Corpus is
that intuition is a manifestation of an
underlying unifying Spirit now I
understand that now you might but but so
why is that well it's Europe
well that that that is exactly the
question and that's and that's where
faith comes in that's the point of Faith
right and that's the step that I can't
make myself make because I don't believe
that that is what it is
okay well I think there's two elements
of Faith there one is if you let your
intuition guide you that's already a
step of Faith because you've decided
that you're going to go in the direction
of your intuition rather than it's about
faith and something someone else is
doing it yes yeah exactly well it's it's
willing to put yourself on the line for
something yes
right and so that Faith isn't exactly
here's what I believe to be a set of
facts that faith is more here's the
risks I'm willing to take according to
this set of principles
uh for me it's more of an experiential
thing as in I've listened to this
intuition before and it has given me
good advice before and every time I
listen to it it gives me good advice
that turns out to be true
okay well then I would also say that's
very much akin to the socratic demon
right so Socrates said in the apologia
when he was asked
um
um this is his trial when he's going to
be put to death
he's explaining why he didn't run away
because the Athenians said they were
going to kill him and they gave him
plenty of warning and they didn't want
to kill him they wanted him to go away
and he knew that and so did his friends
and all of his friends were telling him
to get the hell out of town
and he went and had a conversation with
his Damon
is this Spirit of intuition that you're
describing and his Damon said you can't
run
and he thought well what the hell do you
mean I can't run they want me to run and
they're going to kill me
but Socrates lays it out in the polosia
he says one of the that that it was
widely established in Athens and
elsewhere that Socrates was a singular
person
and even the delphic Oracle had said
that and she said he was singular
because he knew that he didn't know he
was radically humble radically ignorant
but he said that one of the things that
made him different
was that he always listened to the voice
of this statement
and that's the same word as demon but it
means Spirit fundamentally and in that
context he always listened that's what
made him different from other men
now the question is what is the nature
of that guiding Spirit that's right now
Europe well yeah your objection is well
why do we have to consider that God and
I would say that well that's that is
exactly the question and even what would
it mean to consider it God is the
question okay so imagine okay so here's
a set of problems
now you have this intuition that guides
you and you're willing to abide by it
but you have an integration problem like
everyone does which is well you might be
guided by Beauty and you might be guided
by truth and you might be guided by lust
and you might be guided by Envy and you
might be guided by hunger and like
there's a lot of different
animating principles that are going to
be warring around you
and if they're not integrated into
something that's unified then they're
disintegrated and you're going to be
pulled apart
now the the the the other question
you're asking is why does that have to
be conceptualized as as God
okay so to answer that question we'd
have to do something like a technical
analysis of what it means to consider
something God so I would say
well something has to be put in the
highest place and the highest place is
the place that takes predominance over
all other places
and so if you're going to be guided by
the spirit of your intuition then by
necessity at least at that moment you
put it in the highest place and that's
to elevate it to the peak of Mount Sinai
you know symbolically speaking it's to
allow it to be the I at the top of the
pyramid through which you see it's both
of those things and then I would say
technically and I learned this from you
is that
regardless of what you call it this
animating spirit that you put in the
highest place is functionally equivalent
to God and we could look at the
sophisticated religious thinkers know
perfectly well that God is beyond both
name and conceptualization
you know so this isn't a reductive
Enterprise it's it's uh it's uh children
can I ask you a question yes please do
why does this thing have to be outside
of me
it doesn't right so if this thing
doesn't happen to be outside we'll
return to that let's return but let me
let me follow that logical uh sequence
out yeah if this thing is not doesn't
have to be outside of me is it possible
that this intuition is a part of me that
is giving me additional information that
consciously I'm not present to
sure
sure well and therefore the idea that we
have a God to whom we have some sort of
shared affiliation or some shared
connection through him seems to me to be
unnecessary
okay okay so let's let's delve into that
a little bit because I think that's a
very germane question well the first
point of Distinction is what exactly do
you mean by inside of you right because
that's a metaphor and it's not obvious
what it means you do you mean inside the
the what the
the meat of your brain do you mean in
the neural connections like exactly what
does inside mean it means in the inside
the psychological landscape right so is
it inside the domain by my body and
brain right this is a product right the
way that my thoughts are constructed by
my brain and body to understand this is
also a product of that just through a
different communication system okay so
fine so let's take the biological route
then and let's that's fine let's just
make it strictly biological then for the
time being
so then you run into the problem of the
intrinsic logos of the world so let's
say that you are conferring with
something that's revealing itself within
you that's biologically predicated well
then you might say well that's the
wisdom of the world making itself
manifest through the material realm and
that's really what the Greeks believed
like the Greek notion of logos was that
there was an intrinsic order to the
material world
and that if you you allowed that order
to make itself manifest within you that
that would provide you with the most uh
appropriate possible guidance and the
idea of the socratic Daemon is a
reflection of the the logos of the
intrinsic structure of the world and so
the notion would be
well if you're in tune with the
structure of the world as it reveals
itself to you biologically then you're
you're acting in harmony with being
itself I'm perfectly happy with that
formulation there's a there was a
judeo-christian logos idea that got
overlaid on top of that now when when
when there was the what would you call
it reconciliation between the Greek
world view and the judeo-christian world
view and and it adds an extra Dimension
to that you can tell me what you think
about this so in the Jude in the
Christian formulation particularly
Christ is the logos that's a different
idea than the logos or the logic of the
world but
the idea there is that
forthright
confrontation with the catastrophe of
existence will reveal the logos of
existence to you and so that's why those
ideas could be overlaid so imagine that
you're going to consult your intuition
right but here's the precondition and
you tell me if you think this is right
or wrong
you have to admit that you have a
problem first
so you basically have to admit that
you've missed the mark and that you're
you're you're somewhat lost so that's a
humility and it's an opening up to
Revelation that's an attitude a
psychological attitude
now and that's a self-sacrificial
attitude because if you're going to
learn something from the Revelation
Party U is going to have to go
the part of you that's wrong
so you have to bring the psychological
animating Spirit to Bear which is
humility and openness to correction and
then the voice of intuition will make
itself manifest from let's say below
and so that's the way you bring the the
psychological element of the logos and
the material element together
and so and those have to be United as
well or or you're in a state of disunion
so well so that's how I would respond to
that well what I'm learning from these
conversation is I'm a Greek philosopher
Jordan
yeah well well that's a very good thing
to to note like look I I went and talked
to Richard Dawkins about these sorts of
things you know and Dawkins
I was trying to pin him down so he would
talk to me and it took quite a bit of
negotiating back and forth you know
because he's a skeptical guy and he
didn't trust me and he kept writing me
these kind of dismissive emails he'd say
I don't know why you want to talk to me
I don't really understand anything
you're saying and but but then
eventually he said but I think maybe it
has something to do with this and he
sent me this paper which I had read
three decades earlier one of his papers
I learned a lot from Dawkins like I
think Dawkins is a genuine scientist and
in that paper he claimed that he made
the claim that every organism has to be
a microcosm of its environment
so he said for example that if you were
an alien and someone gave you a duck
you you know an earth an earth duck
Earth duck that's an awkward phrase but
you get the point a duck from Earth that
you could infer all sorts of things
about the Earth's environment by taking
the duck apart the density of the
atmosphere the fact that it was
oxygenated the amount of gravity that
was characteristic of the surface
um the presence of water the relative
preponderance of elements in the natural
environment the the structure of the
environment is built into the organism
and there's an ancient
medieval idea it's even older than that
that the human being is a microcosm and
reflects the macrocosm and that's
exactly the case that Dawkins was making
and I thought you do know why I want to
talk to you because that's exactly why I
wanted to talk to you and so
following that logic you could say well
there's a reflection of the cosmic order
within you
and that reflection is there because you
have adapted to the world you are
adapted to the world in in the deepest
parts of you in the deepest recesses of
you and if you consult with that
microcosmic embodiment then it will
reveal intuitions that will move you
forward but those intuitions this is
where I think
The crucial difference in the approach
we're both taking at the moment reveals
itself see you're thinking about that as
something that's personal
and it is personal incense that it
speaks to you personally but it's
impersonal in that that thing is there
whether you're here or not it's no
different than the socratic Daemon and
it's no different than the voice of
intuition that speaks to other people or
at least it has important commonalities
what's the evidence for that it's there
whether I'm here or not
well because other people have spoken of
the same thing but now I'm not saying
there isn't an element of it that's
unique to you there is no my point is
this element That's Unique just because
I have a hat and you have a hat doesn't
mean that the hat is something that we
share in common that's given to us from
above we can all have our own hat
okay I I would say Hat's the wrong
metaphor because it's purely a cultural
construct and so your metaphor Falls
play to pray to the inadequacy of a
postmodern Viewpoint let's think of a
different example all right you have
different examples you have angering
okay anger right let's use anger yes
okay so so so then we might say well
what sort of being is anger
and it's definitely the case that you
get angry in your own way
but it's also the case that if you get
angry everyone can tell that you're
angry and part of the reason they can
tell is because they get angry enough
like you to understand what the hell's
possessing you fun and so this is part
of the collective unconscious problem
that that's another way of thinking
about it or part of the problem that we
share Universal biologically predicated
motivational and emotional structures
there's an element of it that is
idiosyncratic and that's unique to you
and you know religiously speaking that
would be the personal nature of your
relationship with God which isn't
trivial but then there's a universality
of it right because if your intuitions
for example were so idiosyncratic that
no one else at all experienced them not
you could not communicate with anyone
else you certainly couldn't live with
other people right you'd be so far
afield from the norm and this does
happen to people by the way who are
absolute creative Geniuses from time to
time but most of of the time that voice
that's speaking to you speaks in a voice
that's similar to the manner in which
the voice speaks to other people
which is also why I think we have
something like a universality of
conscience
it's it's an interesting thought but I'm
still not persuaded uh by that if two
cans of coke both have the same shape
does that mean they're connected
well they're connected in some ways
because you wouldn't use the word same
otherwise right because you're implying
a connection by the by the fact applying
similarities of their identity yeah
exactly well that's what I mean you're
you're implying similarity and
similarities are very complex concept I
mean you might say that things are from
a spiritual point of view I'm actually
not in disagreement with you I had a
very interesting experience I studied
hypnosis for a long time and in in
hypnosis there is an exercise that you
can do I talked about this when we were
on Joe Rogan's show uh called The Deep
trans identification I don't know if
you're familiar with this uh but what
they do is essentially once someone is
in the Deep State of Trance your
identity can be treated sort of like a
set of clothes that you can take off uh
and put on someone else's identity in
that state and try it out and people
will often use this to uh pick up the
habits of people that they wish to
emulate or things like that and when we
would do doing these exercises in this
hypnosis class
first I did it with a this very sweet
gentle South African lady who wanted to
try on some kind of American preacher
and when we went through the process
with her and she opened her eyes she was
that guy right that and it is it wasn't
I had to run out of the room because
that's how much it scared me actually
that this was possible oh yeah oh yeah
um but when I did it I had a different I
I'm very disagreeable generally so I
tried to be difficult whenever I'm doing
anything like this so rather than being
a person I went what if I try to
identify as the universe whatever that
is in this process right and when I was
doing this
um all I could feel was my heartbeat
slowed down and it was really the only
thing that I was conscious of as it was
happening
and I could feel my heart expanding and
the two things happen simultaneously one
I felt an infinite connection with all
other human beings
in that moment and the second thing I
felt and this was just I'm not saying
this is what it is and I'm not making
any truth Claim about it but this is
what I experienced at the time you know
how the universe is expanding and it's
expanding at an accelerating rate the
the thing that I mean I want to say
popped into my head but it didn't feel
like it popped into my head the thing
that I experienced was what if the
universe expanding is a half a heartbeat
of some greater organism to which we're
all connected so I am entirely open to
the possibility that we are connected I
and the truth is that
part of my hesitation to to call myself
religious is not even the bearded guy in
the sky and whom I don't believe because
I don't believe in him it's also the
fact that I'm just very wary of
organized religion being a perverted way
of having that conversation that can
lead to a lot of problems okay well so
look look fair enough on all fronts and
let me address those points one by one
we'll get back to the identification
with the universe notion here in a
moment but on the I'm afraid of
organized religion front look wary one
of the things I hey man fair enough and
I think that's the evil Uncle problem is
that like every organized social uh unit
has a proclivity to degenerate into a
blind a willfully blind tyranny and that
that's that's part of the existential
reality of mankind now one of the things
I've observed about Harris and Dawkins
and this is particularly true of Sam
Harris is that Harris is very concerned
with the problem of evil and validly so
and deeply so he's committed his life to
it and he would like to establish an
objective morality and the reason he
would like to do that is because he
believes in the reality of the objective
and he also believes in the necessity of
the moral because he's concerned with
evil and so you know I'm kind of on
board with that which is why Sam and I
really actually can talk
but the problem that Sam
has conceptually as far as I'm concerned
is that he identifies the religious
Enterprise
with the totalitarian spirit and that's
the same mistake the postmodernists make
when they identify Western culture with
the patriarchy it's like look it is the
case that large-scale systems can ossify
become willfully blind and degenerate
into tyranny but that doesn't mean that
that's their Central animating Spirit
now you see the same thing with the 1619
project in the United States you know
this this claim that the fundamental
foundation so animating spirit that
drove the formulation of the United
States was the tyrannical desire to
dominate oppress and enslave
and you have to say well let's give the
devil is due every human organization
tilts towards corruption by power
but that doesn't mean that's the central
animating spirit and so I would say well
the same thing applies on the religious
front like my sense is and we can
certainly discuss this is that
and this is really useful to think about
in relationship to Wilbur Wilberforce
so he was a Christian Protestant
operating in the in in Britain and he in
many ways single-handedly forced the
British Empire to not only abandon
slavery but to oppose it on the world
Seas for 175 years and he did that in a
hundred percent as a consequence of
being animated by the the spirit of
protestant liberalism and that was a
consequence of the dissemination and
distribution of the Bible because the
idea was
human beings are made in the image of
God and slavery is wrong period
that's a Transcendent truth and economic
rationale be damned there's no excuse
for it and so
so I think the problem with the
skepticism that you're expressing in
relationship to the religious Enterprise
is that it doesn't sufficiently separate
the wheat from the child I see what
you're saying we're not disagreeing
because let me take you back to the
beginning of this conversation when I
did say to you that I believe religion
is useful
right uh and I I'm fond of I can't
remember who said this but uh someone
said that the poor belief uh religion is
true the middle class believes it's
false and the rich believe it's useful
or the powerful belief it's useful uh I
I'm not powerful or Rich but I certainly
consider it useful and I can see that
the lack of it has its negative impact
as well I just don't wish to submit
myself to a rigid ideology of that kind
combined with the fact I don't believe
in the bigger the guy in the sky right
okay so let's not make it okay so let's
agree that you shouldn't subordinate
yourself arbitrarily to a rigid
structure now you might want to do that
sporadically to discipline yourself
right but the the object shouldn't be
submission
now that what's weird in the biblical
narrative you know is that the the goal
is not submission
so weird it's covenantal relationship
and covenantal relationship is actually
relationships so one of the things you
see with Moses for example and you also
see this with Abraham is that they're
constantly negotiating with God
that's why my the name of my next book
by the way is we who wrestle with God
it's a negotiation it's not a submission
and so God is always threatening to wipe
out the Israelites in the desert he's
just sick and tired of their idol
worship and their whiny resentment and
their bitterness and their worship of
the past tyranny and he's constantly
threatening just to wipe them out and
start again
and that's the apocalypse I suppose and
Moses is constantly interceding on their
behalf and telling God he shouldn't
break his word and the odd thing in the
story is that God actually listens which
is rather Preposterous but but the
reason that's happening is to mitigate
against exactly the problem that you
described which is to have the
relationship with the Transcendent
degenerate into nothing but a blind
obedience and then the danger of that is
well a blind obedience
to who and I see this as a threat in
Islam in the more fundamentalist forms
of Islam it's like well you should
submit to Ella it's like hey fair enough
Ella as interpreted by who oh uh
totalitarian misogynistic mullahs how
about no
I I don't buy your Ella and I don't see
who made you the right precise and even
if I believe the bearded guy in the sky
I'm not sure I need a middleman to talk
to him
right well that makes you a good
Protestant well but but look we could
well we could also go down that rabbit
hole a little bit you know and it's
worth it because I also think this is
how we ended up in this post-modern
um excess liberal conundrum so Jung
talked about Catholicism as we mentioned
and he talked about the utility of the
and mercy of the confessional and that
possibility of atonement but he also
laid out you know the dangers of that
the dangers of the Catholic structure is
uh what would you say a tilt towards
authoritarian rigidity which is what the
Protestants rebelled against
but then the question is well what's the
danger of the Protestant Revolution and
the danger is that everybody becomes his
own church
and then here's the problem you tell me
what you think about this here's the
logical conclusion of that you're your
own church you're your own God now you
can say what God said to Moses out of
the depths of the burning bush you can
say I am what I am
and I would say that's what the identity
politics types do
they say look I am so superordinate in
my own self-defining identity that no
matter what identity claim I put forward
it is incumbent upon you to accept it as
if it comes from an omniscient source
[Music]
and I think like I as far as I can tell
Constantine that's where we are right
increasingly by force of law if you make
an identity claim no matter how
Preposterous which implies that there's
some limit to Identity claims by the way
like I have to accept
well there's one example in in
Ontario right now this become famous for
its surreality so there's a female
teacher in a suburb in Toronto who has
decided at the rape old age of something
approximating 50 that he's actually a
woman but he's not just a woman man he's
he's the Earth goddess herself and he
wears these like 144 quadruple D
prosthetic breasts I don't know if
you've seen pictures yeah
yeah well exactly it's it's she's an
embodiment of that primordial Jordan am
I hearing you correct if I look at what
you're saying then are you suggesting
that we need God to agree on truth
I'm saying is that Spirit which would
enable us to agree on truth is for all
intents and purposes equivalent to God
and necessarily so so without that we
cannot agree on what the truth is okay
well okay so look I've been having the
same conversation I'm having with you
with Douglas Murray um
okay and with Jonathan pajo at the same
time now Murray was very attracted by
outright atheism and he was tempted and
invited as far as I can tell to be part
of the Four Horsemen of atheism cotery
right and and but that it's been very
interesting talking to Douglas in recent
years because he's got to that point
that you described which is let's say
the aristocratic position that religion
is useful but he's actually stepped past
that and doesn't know what to do with it
and and I think that's the case for many
people on the more traditional front now
is that
well the metaphysic that unites us has
to be grounded in something that isn't
merely
that isn't merely political and and
semantic that's that's the right way of
thinking about it there has to be
something transcendental about it akin
to that experience you've had of
connection to all Humanity yes okay now
look Sam Harris thinks the same thing
which is why he's off in meditative
space half the time right he has an
unnameable God because then his
his semantic brain can't tear it to
shreds he understands that it's
necessary to dip into the realm of the
transcendent
sporadically in order to renew yourself
you know and he'll say well that's not
religious it's like well
it's not totalitarian and it's not
systematic
that doesn't mean it's not religious and
then Harris of course his
approach false prey to the same problem
as a kind of abstract Buddhism which is
yeah well that's all well and good on
the transcendental front but how do you
make that cell how do you make that
manifest in life and how to unite other
people in that ethos and that's a that's
a practical problem and you need
intermediary structures to do that well
that's why I think religion is useful
for uniting most people because my
experience is they need it I have many
people in my life and in my family who
cannot process their fear of death
without religion they just can't deal
with it
um and we all they all mask it and they
all kind of deal with it in one way or
another but it is having the sense of
something above them in that particular
way that gives them the Comfort to live
their life and there are other people
who maybe don't need it I certainly
don't I enjoy my life I know I'm gonna
die I know that my life only this is my
experience in my view my life only has
the meaning that I give to it and I get
to choose that now that puts in question
the nature of morality I appreciate that
and for for society there has to be a
structure that gives you a sense of what
morality is which is why I say religion
is useful but for me personally it's not
so when you say you choose it but let's
let's go down that road for a minute
because all right so you open yourself
up to an intuition and tell tell me if
I've got this wrong and the intuition
makes itself manifest
and the choices whether you accept that
or not does that seem reasonable yes
okay so that doesn't mean that the
source of the intuition is you precisely
it does mean that you have a
relationship of choice though
okay but I don't think that's any
different than this covenantal idea that
I described earlier I think it's a
reflection of the same I'm not trying to
reduce what you're saying to that I'm
aware yeah we're having a good question
so what I don't understand and I'm open
to be persuaded is why the leap has to
be made to the idea that this thing that
I experience and that I have as a let's
call let's say it's a tool right I can
dip into this source of information that
I have access to they can give me a
useful advice how you go from that to
the idea that we're all connected under
this one thing that this is a thing the
fact that other people have similar
experiences could also mean like other
people have thoughts because they have
brains okay that's a great question
that's a great question and it's the
same question as
let's assume for a moment that
the voice of intuition that speaks to
you
has a moral element and the moral
element is that it's going to shape your
perceptions and your behaviors now you
could say that's the idiosyncratic right
that it's only unique to you and some of
that's going to be true because that's
true insofar as you're really creative
let's say or even revolutionary but here
here's the rub as far as I can tell
okay so there's this idea that emerges
in Exodus that the well-constituted
polity has to have two dimensions
there has to be a vertical Dimension
that unites it with the Transcendent so
that would be like the king's fealty to
to to God the idea that the king himself
is subordinate to a set of transcendent
principles and so is everyone else so
that's the vertical axis and that would
be that feeling of universality that you
described like sort of descending upon
you but then there's a horizontal axis
and the horizontal axis is something
like
well I have to conduct myself
so that I can engage in repeated acts of
reciprocal altruism with other people
yes
okay now you need both of those because
sometimes you know you might say well
you should get along to go along or you
should go along to get along you should
conduct yourself the way other people
want you to conduct yourself
and that's usually true except when
everyone goes crazy right
and then you might say well what do you
need to bind you when everyone goes
crazy and the answer is well you need
that relationship with the vertical
and so except the potential to run the
structure that connects people to the
vertical often go crazy too
I I absolutely that's a big problem but
that's why it it's why it's a mistake to
construe the religious Enterprises
something that's only a consequence of
tradition like look in the Jewish
writings you've got two sources of the
religious Enterprise you've got the
you've got the tradition
and that goes corrupt let's say in the
form of a corrupt King but then you have
the prophets and the prophets are those
who stand up and say to the corrupt King
you know there's a divine order against
which you're transgressing and if you
don't get your act together all hell is
going to break loose even though you're
King now your question might be well how
do we tell the false prophets from the
true prophets and that's I well and the
answer to that is by their fruits you
will know them that's one answer to that
but but it does reflect this underlying
problem but you've already said in
yourself you know you you you're leery
to accept divine revelation in the form
of a handed down tradition right and
that does make you a Protestant in the
most fundamental sense but you also do
note that you have access to something
like
into like the pool of intuition let's
put it that way that can tap you right I
would say that to the degree that that
intuition is a reliable source
it's also going to be structured so that
it facilitates your ongoing interactions
with other people in the best possible
manner
so it's not purely idiosyncratic right
it it's again it's subject to its own
logos its own internal logic if if the
it may be upon occasion that that
internal voice will do what Socrates did
Socrates voice which is to say you have
to off offer yourself up as sacrificial
victim to the Mob right and God help us
from that eventuality but that may
happen upon occasion but it's still the
case that if that voice of intuition is
deep when it rises within you it's going
to
rise up within you in a manner that
facilitates
your integration with the social
community and the social communities
Improvement
at least you better hope that that's the
case
right
but that all those things are to my
benefit and also even the Socrates
example I mean
I I think you and I both you to a much
greater extent have offered ourselves up
a sacrificial uh for for the purposes of
combating this bad religion that we
talked about earlier but even that to me
just seems that it's easier to explain
but something as simple as principles
that have been inculcated in me by my
life experience and by family so as
someone who's descended from uh Soviet
dissidents who spent plenty of time in
the gulag I'm not prepared uh to say
that a male teacher who has gigantic
breasts as a woman uh because the
concept of truth that is more valuable
to me than my reputation or career and
whatever else right so again I I don't
know that the the inclusion of the
Divine is necessary for those things to
be explained okay okay great great Okay
so so I think there's a technical answer
to that question too so there's a
there's a scene in the gospels where you
know the Pharisees and the uh scribes so
they're the woke bureaucrats really in
many ways they're trying to trap Christ
all the time because they think he's
dangerous and they'd like to nail him
for heresy
and so they get a lawyer to come up to
him and say uh Master which you you you
you say you abide by The Commandments uh
which of them is the greatest and here's
the trick the trick is
well no matter what Christ says they're
going to nail them because if he makes
any one commandment
superordinate to the others then he
denigrates the others and they can go
after him on that front so they really
put him on the spot
and he says something that refers back
to this principle of Mount Sinai this
idea of a horizontal and a vertical axis
right and he says
um you should love God with all yours
with all your heart and with all your
mind and you should love other people as
you love yourself
and so and then he says and those that's
the meta principle upon which all the
Commandments rest and so it's an amazing
sleight of hand because he answers the
question
but he doesn't allow himself to be
trapped and what he says is and this is
akin to what you just laid out you said
well I don't need faith in a religious
structure because I can abide by these
principles and so we can think of the
principles as your version of The Ten
Commandments maybe there's 20 of them I
don't know how many there are but and
they're derived from your own experience
and I think and the experience of your
family but then you might think
let's assume for a moment that all those
principles are good
and so we're assuming that
there's a commonality across the
principles and that commonality is that
which I allows them to be categorized as
good
okay and then the question would be well
what's the underlying meta principle
that unites them as good and that's
exactly the question that Christ is
trying to answer so he says well you
want to be oriented towards the highest
good conceivable
you want to be open to that and so that
would be something like making the
decision in your life that you are going
to strive towards whatever was good
whatever that is right just just to make
that the initial proposition
and then you were going to treat other
people as if they were as valuable as
you are and vice versa
and that that's the underlying
two-dimensional two dimensions of the
principle that gives rise to let's say
all necessary Commandments
and then I would say
that
the spirit that puts God above all else
puts the Divine Above All Else and that
unites us with other people that is what
the monotheistic tendency tilts towards
portraying
psychologically it's an attempt to flesh
out what that is that's how it looks to
me
fair enough so you know like are you the
question is I think Constantine the
question is pretty simple
if your principles are coherent
then there's a meta principle that
unites them
and then the fundamental religious
question would be well what is that meta
principle and how do you how do you
conduct yourself in relationship to it
that makes sense
it puts it puts in question the very
nature of morality and where it comes
from I understand that
um but I certainly wouldn't make the
claim that my principles are coherent I
don't know that they are uh I I it's
something that I I try to follow based
on like I said values passed down by
family and probably uh judeo-christian
in origin at one point
um so I don't have a good answer for you
hey it's it's not an easy thing to to
like spontaneously generate up an answer
for but I would also say you know you
said you're not sure your principles are
coherent and I would say well
of course they're not to some degree
right because
no one is characterized by a state of
perfect coherence right I think that
would be paradisal in in the most
literal sense to have that and I think
now and then we snap into a coherence
and when that happens well you have kids
now don't you I've got one so far we've
got one okay so so you you made an
allusion to that before and so I think
that one of the things that having
children does is it opens you up to a
kind of paradisal coherence upon
occasion because you now love someone
certainly I would say if you have any
sense
more than you love yourself you value
that person more you and that you'd
sacrifice yourself for them yes
um and I would say that in that depth of
love you get a glimpse of what that
coherence could be you know because then
you know that because you also alluded
to the fact that when you had a child
that also compelled you to take another
step forward on the maturation front yes
right which which which is exactly of
course what happens to you if you have a
child if you aren't a narcissist right
to the damn core is that you do
you shed a lot of immaturity and you
become a lot more coherent and I think
that does reveal itself in love
I really believe that
very interesting
today we went pretty damn deep down the
rabbit hole on the religious front with
Constantine but that makes sense because
it's what's lurking underneath your
speech at Oxford you know it's it
because you're making the case you're
making the case essentially that
whatever this woke Enterprise is has a
quasi-religious structure and it doesn't
look like it's doing the job well no and
you're implying too that we need a
vision to replace it and it has to be an
Invitational a positive Invitational
Vision it can't just be us shaking our
fingers at the woke types and saying you
guys are going off the deep end it's
like because they can just say well oh
wise conservatives where do you think
the shallow end is and if we say well
it's not where you're pointing
yeah fair enough but that's a pretty
there is another reason why that is a
bad strategy in my opinion Jordan by the
way we had to do that we had to
understand what was going on we had to
articulate what was going on we had to
explain to ourselves into the broader
public what the problem was and what was
happening that was necessary so I don't
uh apologize or criticize or or any of
that those of us who've pushed back
against this and yes you're right a
positive vision is needed so that we can
say to people well this is where you
should put your energies but there's
also another reason which is
that the process of pointing the finger
at the woke and saying you're becoming
deranged makes you deranged and you can
see that very clearly as you look around
at anti-work people now
um I I say this often now you'll be
familiar with online meme of I support
the current thing which is what all the
non-mainstream people use to sort of
make fun of of the mainstream people who
jump from cause to cause to cause you
know the flavor of the month whatever
but I see very clearly now that there is
the uh the exact and opposite reaction
happening where a portion of the
anti-work or the right or whatever you
want to call them have become I oppose
the current thing and it is enough for
them that the mainstream Media or the
corporate Media or whatever are saying
something to believe the exact opposite
without doing any research or any
critical thinking applied whatsoever and
we should be very concerned about that
in my opinion as much as we've been
concerned about the work stuff so the
positive division is needed not only to
inspire these young woke people to build
and make things of this of themselves
it's also needed so that those of us so
that we do not become the abyss that
we've been staring into and I think that
is already happening right well you know
that's that's also because it's always
good to give the devil is due I mean
people on the left are right to oppose
corporate slash government gigantism and
collusion and people like Bernie Sanders
and Russell Brand and Joe Rogan to some
degree do a quite a nice job of that on
the left
and then also the criticism that the
left levies against the right which is
you're just reactionary is a valid
criticism because of what you just laid
out is that if you just become the
mirror opposite of that which you're
opposing
it's not the mirror opposite it's you
become the mere reaction to that which
you were opposing then you will fall
prey to the same
set of problems right and this is
something I'm worried about on the
Florida front for example like I've
talked to Christopher Ruffo and and he's
a good staunch wall and I would say the
same thing about DeSantis but the
conservatives are toying with censorship
as an answer to the problem of the woke
miasma and
it's very complicated because I do
believe that no has to be said to drag
queen's Story Hour but by the same token
as soon as you go down the the book
forbidding root you instantly introduce
into your own ethos the problem of
enabling the sensors who are operating
by the same principles
in principle on your side and that's a
huge problem and so
for me this has to be battled out in the
realm of ideas like we're doing today
right we're trying to see where we can
get on this front and
you you it's very difficult to define a
set of ideas and then forbid them
without falling prey to the problem of
having to forbid all sorts of things
that maybe you should be leaving the
hell alone
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest
[Music]
Spirit to which we're beholden is
presented precisely as that spirit that
allies itself with the cause of Freedom
against tyranny
I want villains to get punished but do
you want the villains to learn before
they have to pay the ultimate price
that's such a Christian question
and part of it I think is also the
inability to articulate what you are for
uh therefore you have to become
destructive about what other people are
saying because you can't win the Battle
of ideas with an absence of ideas you
can't win a battle of ideas by saying
your ideas crap because sure it's crap
but if you're not offering it if you're
afraid to offer anything in exchange and
that's where we are I think I think uh
people on the conservative side of
things are afraid to to say the things
that they ought to say which is some of
the things that you were articulating
earlier about the age seven or eight
different things in life that want ought
to focus on in order to make for a
meaningful life well if you're afraid to
say any of those things then the only
thing that you have left is to become
the destructive mirror version of the
thing that you're fighting and I see
this the problem I see with this and
that's why I wanted to talk to you about
the the Ukraine thing as well is I see
the anti-work instinctively go going to
a position of well whatever we're being
told is automatically untrue and
automatically wrong and that means that
they no longer believe in the concept of
truth either if to you the truth is the
opposite of what the mainstream is
saying you don't believe in truth either
all you believe is in this pointless
destructive battle that in which truth
and reality no longer exists and I think
Jordan one of the biggest challenges
that we face is the technological
destruction of the very idea of truth
that we're living through that is what I
think we're wrestling with so the
conversation that we had obviously did
go very deep and we talked about God and
religion but if your claim is
that we cannot agree on truth without
God
then uh maybe uh maybe I'm I'm gonna
potentially agree with you that that's
perhaps what the world needs because if
you think that's the only way we're
going to get around truth we need
something because right now neither side
knows what the truth is well the the
question is Constantine I think to some
degree the question there is
by necessity
image of God by necessity nested inside
the claim that there is such a thing as
truth
and I I think it might be because one of
the things I've been seeing happening
and this isn't the fact that this is
happening isn't self-evident that it
would happen like inevitable you know is
that and I think this is what's put
people like Richard Dawkins back on
their heels a little bit is that the
Hope was that if we got rid of the
superstitious totalitarianism of the
religious delusion that everyone would
spring 4 000 Enlightenment scientists
now the problem is is that most
scientists aren't scientists yeah maybe
two or three percent of them are it's
really hard to be a scientist you have
to really be oriented towards the truth
and nothing else and I do think darkens
to a large degree falls into that
category I think Dawkins acts out the
proposition that the Universe has an
intrinsic logos and that the pursuit of
that will set you free now he he
believes the religious Enterprise
interferes with that but the fundamental
ethos that he acts out is nonetheless I
believe a religious ethos
um it isn't obvious to me at all I think
that if we lose God so God is dead we'll
lose science too and I think that's
playing out right now man is there less
of an assault on the idea of religious
Transcendence than there is an assault
on the idea of scientific truth I don't
think so I think they're both under the
gun to exactly the same degree and the
stem Fields science technology
engineering and Mathematics are you know
their fallen prey to the machinations of
the woke left like a like a butter stick
and you know being run through by a hot
knife we could easily lose the
scientific Enterprise well this is why
I've always said that the trans thing is
what will break intersectionality and
wokeness because that is a point at
which reality does clash with uh
ideology and to the extent that reality
exists and I believe it exists and Truth
exists that is a focal point where you
cannot pretend anymore once you've cut a
teenage girl's breasts off and she's not
happy about it three days three years
later that is a point at which whatever
ideas you had in your head about
everyone's everyone gets to Define
themselves well guess what that is the
point of which reality clashes and it's
it's the same with parents obviously
we've just interviewed somebody about
this a woman who transitioned her child
and regretted it and we'll be putting
that out very shortly oh okay and I did
an interview with Chloe Court I saw that
who had transitioned and regretted it
yeah and I think
well at the beginning of Genesis when
God creates human beings he does say
well people are made in the image of God
so that's the installation of this
Divine Transcendent value that's part
and parcel of
let's say the Eternal Soul right it's
emblematic of the intrinsic uh dignity
and and importance of each person
regardless of status but then the second
phrase is men and women he created them
right the notion that there is this
fundamental bifurcation that's built
into the structure of reality itself and
you could easily you can easily make
that into you can easily make a
biological case for that I mean right
sex is I don't know if there is a
conceptual or perceptual category an
orienting category I don't think there's
an orienting category that's more
fundamental than male and female I don't
I think it's more fundamental than up
and down
and so you blow that out with your Tower
of Babel which is exactly what we're
doing right now is you blow out
everything and so I do think the T in
the LGBT Etc uh alphabet panoply the t
is going to be the breaking point I do
believe that because that is the point
of which the truth claims are evidently
impossible to maintain the identity
truth claims that people make and we
have just had uh this case in the UK in
the Scottish prison where a double
rapist was put into a female prison and
the public are starting to realize
what's going on Jordan and I have always
said this would happen because on the
most things people will go along as you
said to get along but on this sort of
stuff they can't anymore and so not when
their children are at stake that's
exactly right and whether children or
frankly women as well when women women's
safeties are at stake so women's safety
is at stake so that's why it seems to me
that we're coming to some kind of head
on this position irrespective of the
conversation we've had about God or not
the truth claims of the woke
identitarians are going to start to
crumble over time and that I think will
be the the focal point for which that
happens while we're also we're also
seeing a with the notion of evil I would
say because the the woke narrative is
that all oppressed are victimized and
innocent
but there's a real problem with that and
the problem is The Fringe of the fringes
and On The Fringe of the fridges or
fringes are the narcissistic Psychopaths
who are sadists as well and who are who
are bad right to the Bone you know
perhaps even beyond the point of any
atonement or forgiveness or at least
that on the human realm and if you don't
think that there are people out there
who are sexual serial Slayers or or
Predators who are perfectly willing to
adopt a female identity to fool woke
idiots into giving them access to women
you are naive to the point of being a
danger to yourself and everyone else and
when I watch people like the Scottish
prime minister do backflips to try to
deny the reality of people like that I
think you bloody wear better hope up
hope for your own sake that one of those
Psychopathic deviants doesn't make
himself manifest in your bedroom in the
middle of the night one day
so there's a naivety there about the
reality of evil that is also as deep as
the denial of basic let's say both
biological and metaphysical slash
conceptual reality and that is a hard
wall to run into it's the main problem
with the systemic uh way of looking at
society as they do because if you
believe that people's behavior is
predetermined by structures and systems
then that those marginal deviants can't
be accounted for that this is why the
agreement of wokism they believe in
abolishing prisons and the police and
the reason they believe that is they
believe that you can only be made into a
Criminal by a bad corrupt system instead
of recognizing the fact that criminals
and bad people have always existed
throughout history because that seems to
be the distribution of skills and
talents and predilections and
psychological traits
um choices and choices so yeah that's
the big one that we can't talk about but
yeah it's exactly right so that's the
fundamental flow and Analysis but it of
course produces these crazy ideas uh
where people believe that you know well
no one is ever going to be bad unless
the system made them so well guess what
that's not how life works
right right definitely definitely the
system makes lots of people better than
they would otherwise be it makes some
people worse and some people choose to
become worse of their own accord right
they Dance with the Devil and uh and
they do that voluntarily I mean even
when God calls out Cain in the story of
Cain and Abel he basically says to Cain
um
sin crouches at your door
that's the temptation to be envious of
Abel and to be
you know fratricidally
vengeful God says to Cain your
sacrifices have been rejected because
you didn't put enough effort into them
and that's made you bitter and now sin
Crouch is at your door like a sexually
aroused predatory animal and you've
invited it in to have its way with you
and all the consequences of that are on
you
and that's exactly right as far as I've
been able to tell is that people can be
alienated and marginalized and pushed
out of society and that can be very
unfair but then when they get bitter and
decide to open the door to
the vampire that's lurking outside then
they enter into a creative bargain with
said spirit and all hell breaks loose
and there's an element of choice in that
and if you don't see that then you're
blind enough so that you will be the
prey of those predators
so that's why we need the positive
Vision Jordan that's why I'm excited
about and by the way I know where we
want to wrap up but I I will just say
this that I think what you're in in
formulating this idea of needing some
kind of positive Vision you're actually
channeling something that a lot of
people are feeling I've noticed that
almost everyone I suggest I talked about
and I've been talking to mutual friends
of ours for a long time about the fact
that we need to start thinking in a more
positive way
um everyone gets it the time is now and
this is what this is what in my opinion
the world needs right now it needs a
positive vision of the future that
people can unite and it's got to be
voluntary I yes it has to be voluntary
absolutely and it has to be based on
widespread distribution of
responsibility to everyone it can't be
top down well and that goes along with
being voluntary well what's been weird
about putting together this Enterprise
and we're going to release more details
about it soon is that
everyone I've talked to in like 25
countries
immediately says we really need to do
that I'm on board I'll rearrange my
schedule what can I do to help and not
only that the the group of people that
has aggregated itself together around
this Vision has been able to very
rapidly move towards the formulation of
six key questions and even that was
uniting and that's very strange right
because this is a Preposterous
Enterprise and the probability that it
would produce nothing but fractiousness
and resistance is extraordinarily high
and yet that isn't what's happening it's
not strange to me at all it's not
strange to me and this is why I come
back to intuition because this is what
the world needs it does not surprise me
that everything is aligning to make it
happen and the reason that people are
canceling appointments and whatever is
they recognize fundamentally that the
problem we've been trying to solve for
the last however many six or seven years
at least is not going to get solved by
the methods we've been using so far and
something new and radical is necessary
that is constructive in nature because
the world has become a very destructive
place that's part of that universality
of underlying intuition right you can
see in that that the time calls for a
particular solution and then that
intuition makes it manifests it makes
itself manifest to everyone and that is
part of a uniting
what would you call it well it's part of
the manifestation of a uniting spirit
there's no other real way of
characterizing it now I disagree Bob we
probably don't have the time no well how
you regard the nature of that Spirit
well we're all looking at a world we're
seeing the problem and because we're
able to respond to the thing that we're
seeing we're generating a solution and
the solution to me is obvious
ly that's
be the case and that seems to be how
it's playing itself out so now we have
let's do it exactly well we have to uh
what would you say Orient ourselves very
carefully so that the Temptations
for this to be undermined by something
that is once yet again top down don't
make themselves manifest yeah all right
Constantine and it's for everyone
watching and listening on YouTube or the
associated platforms thank you very much
for your time and attention thanks for
agreeing to talk to me to again today uh
we'll turn now to the Daily wire plus
side of the conversation I'll spend
another half an hour with Constantine
talking about how his particular
interests made themselves manifest that
Spirit of intuition let's say across his
life and uh some of you will join me
there on the daily wire plus platform
and Constantine good luck with
trigonometry moving forward and it looks
like you've gone past the point of
likely cancellation now
um and that's that's a nice threshold to
have crossed and congratulations on your
Oxford talk and you said you figured 200
million 100 to 200 million views that's
quite the that's quite the home run so
congrats on that
thank you very much Jordan it's a
pleasure and we look forward to having
you back on trigonometry and I'd love to
talk with you about the other subjects
we wanted to cover yeah well I'd like to
talk about Russia and the Ukraine at
some point so maybe we can do that
sooner rather than later let's do it
okay good to talk to you man and we'll
and we'll see uh to those of you
watching and listening thanks very much
to the film crew put this together today
appreciate that and to the Daily wire
plus people for making these
conversations uh technically proficient
and of high quality in terms of the
production values that's much
appreciated as well
ciao
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com